Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Here is Anthony as the author of over 30 science fiction and fantasy novels.
His science fiction novels include Thone, Macroscope and the Omnivore series.
Anthony's fantasy novels include Hassan and the well-known Xanth series.
He's also written what he calls Science Fantasy.
The best examples of this genre are his cluster novels and the associated three-volume tarot
novel.
Since Anthony writes both science fiction and fantasy, we ask him which one he prefers
to write.
For the challenge, for the sheer joy of getting in and tackling a difficult problem and surmounting
it, science fiction is better.
But if I need money, it's fantasy.
I make my money on fantasy and it's very easy to do.
So that it depends on what I really want.
If I want to do something that I will feel will live after me and really be worth my
effort, then it is science fiction.
But right now I would say about three quarters of my money is being made in a fantasy.
So that it is a certain pleasure to be able to do something like that and just be richly
rewarded for it.
Not so much intellectually, but I can't just ignore the financial aspect.
It's nice to be paid well as well.
But once he starts writing on either genre, Anthony admits he enjoys it.
Actually, I do enjoy each when I get into it.
Whatever a genre or whatever project I get into, I do the very best I can and generally
satisfied that I've done the best that I can in that particular genre.
There are different thrusts, you might say.
Right now, Anthony's fantasy commands a much larger audience than does his science fiction.
For the decade or so that I wrote science fiction before I got into fantasy in any big way,
I would have sales of 50,000, 60,000 copies, 100,000, and some over the years some of my
better ones would build up beyond that.
I've only been into fantasy for the past five years and they're already selling in the
quarter million copies of class.
I think my first recent fantasy, a spell for chameleon, has now sold about 280,000 copies.
So it's just much, much bigger than the science fiction, much faster and much more.
We ask Anthony what reason he gives for the popularity of fantasy in general these days.
That's something that a lot of people are speculating on now.
And my answer may be fairly simple and others may not agree with it.
For a number of years there simply wasn't much market for fantasy and everybody knew it
so nobody wrote it.
Delray Books decided to take a plunge and get into fantasy in a big way.
They went out and they tried to get new authors, they tried to get old ones to convert over
and do serious, well-written fantasy.
I was one of the ones that shifted over from science fiction to fantasy.
And apparently it worked because now most of the best-selling fantasy is with this one publisher, Delray Books.
I conjecture that they took the plunge and it worked.
That when fantasy was given the same push as science fiction was, it had the same success and now is being carried on
perhaps on momentum beyond the science fiction level.
Now most people will tell you there's a deep philosophical aspect that somehow people crave fantasy when they don't crave science fiction
but I don't see that the world has changed that much in five years to make people suddenly crave a genre that they didn't want before.
I think again the answer has to be in the commercial aspect, in the push, in the advertising, in the promotion that they give the novels.
I think people just didn't know about fantasy before.
As I said, this is not an answer most people will give you and I'm not sure whether it's accurate, it's just my theory.
More with Pierce Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And the Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction and Fantasy author Pierce Anthony has written the enormously successful fantasy series popularly called the Xanth series.
A Spell for Chameleon appeared in September 1977.
It tells the story of Bink, a young man growing up in the enchanted land of Xanth, who is attempting to discover his unique individual magical ability.
A Spell for Chameleon sets the stage for the succeeding Xanth books.
It is an adventure fantasy loaded with humor, especially puns.
When a Spell for Chameleon appeared in 1977, it was meant to be a standalone novel.
However, as Anthony tells us, he came to write Two Sequels, the source of magic which appeared in February 1979, and Castle Rugna which appeared in July of that year.
The editor also had to write his work.
So before it was published, the editor said, will you do another fantasy for us?
And he was not thinking of another in the same framework, and neither was I.
But when I got to thinking about it and working out and trying to find another fantasy setup, I realized that there was more that I wanted to say about the land of Xanth.
I sort of liked it.
So I asked him if it would be alright to do another one in that framework.
And I think a little bit reluctantly, the editor agreed, and we did it.
And then the thing was almost the best seller.
It did very well, and that pretty well established Xanth as a series.
It just kept on going.
We did a third one, said let's wrap it up as a trilogy and not do any more.
Then the readers started demanding more and more and more and more.
And finally, both the publisher and the author were...
It's hard to say no when the readers are begging for more, really.
And so we have gone along, and it's been very rewarding, actually.
So there's the answer for those who say Pierre Xanthony doesn't know how many books were in a trilogy.
It wasn't his intent to make the Xanth series a trilogy.
At this time, Centaur Isle, Ogre Ogre, and Nightmare have been released, making a total of six in the series.
Anthony told us that the series will probably go on indefinitely.
At the time of the interview, only four Xanth novels had been published.
Well, I think of it as an open-ended series.
I've actually written seven.
I'm finishing the seventh one now. I'm actually typing it right now.
And I have two more that I'm thinking of.
As you see, there are four in print, but there will be two more coming out later this year.
I'm bringing it up to six, and then the seventh will appear about a year later.
And I think as long as the market holds up, as long as there's demand,
I'll probably do one more Xanth novel a year.
Just indefinitely.
When people get tired of Xanth and the sales go down, we'll quit.
So it really has no end, I suspect.
But it may go one novel a year for the next 20 years. I don't know.
As the reader can well imagine, Anthony has a good time writing the Xanth novels.
I say it's not what I regard great literature. It's not terrifically challenging.
But it has two things going for it. One is that it pays very well,
and that's all in a recession like this. It helps to have something you know will pay.
And the other is that it is an awful lot of fun to do.
I can just get there and sort of relax.
You know, it's like being at home with your shoes off and just relaxing and enjoying yourself.
I enjoy it more than just about anything else.
But as I said, I like to do something with challenge so that I don't want to do nothing but Xanth.
But in between other novels, it's very nice to come back and just let myself go
and work out puns that nobody else would tolerate in Xanth.
They're all right. And I probably enjoy writing them as much as my readers enjoy reading them.
More about Piers and Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction and Fantasy author Piers Anthony has over 40 novels to his credit.
One of his best series is the Cluster series, which Anthony calls Science Fantasy.
It began as a designed trilogy comprising Cluster, Chaining the Lady, and Curly and Quest.
But two additional related novels have been added to the list, Thousand Star and Viscous Circle.
Central to this series of novels is the Tarot Religion,
a much more sophisticated version of the Tarot fortune-telling cards which have been around hundreds of years.
Anthony informed us that while he was researching the Cluster novels,
he came across an interesting group who used Tarot cards.
Here he tells us how material he got from that group got included in the Cluster novels.
I was doing the research, see I work ahead.
So I was doing research and looking at things and just studying things in general.
I like to say now I learn more each year than I ever did in school or college, just because I like knowledge.
And so I was working on the Cluster novels at this time, and this material suddenly gave a new direction to it.
So I put in Tarot scenes, one major scene, one chapter in each of the Cluster novels.
It had not originally been there, and I built.
I merged the frameworks.
Tarot is in the Cluster framework, and the Tarot material appears in the Cluster novels.
It was a kind of a meeting, you might say, of two ideas, the Tarot idea and the framework that I had already developed.
When the Cluster trilogy was completed, Anthony digressed to show the origin and original tenets of the Tarot religion.
The books making up this history are God of Tarot, Vision of Tarot, and Faith of Tarot.
But be aware that this is not a trilogy, although some reviewers have called it so.
It is actually one long novel which was broken into three volumes, much to Anthony's displeasure.
It was one quarter million word novel.
I wrote it in one piece, and the publisher's balk at size.
I don't know why in mainstream people can get quarter million word novels published in their best sellers,
but in science fiction they wouldn't do it for me.
They insisted on breaking it up.
Well, my agent and I fought this.
We even went to the extent of taking about a 30% cut in a payment
for the sole reason to have it published as one novel.
So they gave us the, I think they offered $15,000, and they cut it to $11,500 for it,
and signed the agreement that they would publish it as one novel.
Whereupon they broke it up into three.
They didn't give me back the money, and the publisher published the first third of it,
and went out of business.
That was Joe.
Joe was brought out by the combine that, you know, Berkeley was part of.
Berkeley went ahead, published the other two novels in a different year
so that I couldn't even get my novel published in one year.
It bothered me because I feel that this is the major novel of my career.
Split into three parts, and divided between two years.
It washed me out totally.
I had no chance to make a run for any awards or anything like that.
It was simply gone, which is what tends to happen to my more important work.
So I'm rather put out about this because I felt the major work of my career
was virtually destroyed by the publisher.
Not that the publisher set out to do that,
but I mean by the publisher going out of business right in the middle of my novel
by refusing to honor the original commitment.
Part of the agreement was when they finally broke it up,
I had to sign a paper saying, all right, if you've got to break it up, you've got to...
but never will this be referred to as a trilogy, because it's not.
See, I write, when I write a novel, it's complete.
I tie up the loose ends.
And to publish a third of a novel, and then call it a full novel in itself,
that's just not the way I write.
Other people write that way. I'm aware of it. I don't.
I like to wrap up my loose ends.
As it happened, I saw a review of it.
The first third, the reviewer never even realized it was only a third of a novel.
So apparently he's used to seeing these fragments.
More about Pierce Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
The program was produced by the University of Odessa
and the University of Odessa University.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on Science Fiction and Fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction and Fantasy author Pierce Anthony
has been writing in these genres since the mid-60s.
Anthony's apparent production was fairly low until 1977
when his work began appearing with increasing frequency.
Right. Since that apparently sudden explosion of effort in 1977,
some 18 Anthony volumes have appeared in print for the first time.
But Anthony did not suddenly begin writing in a brisk or pace.
He told us that he had been blacklisted by the publishing industry
in the early 70s because he had insisted on being paid fairly
for his first published novel, Thone.
The explosion of his works in print in 1977
was a result of his overcoming the blacklisting.
Here Anthony explains.
I'll say 50% of my output was getting into print.
But when I finally got through that,
I finally became apparent to some of these publishers
that I was the one that was right, you see.
See, the word was being spread by the blacklisters
how difficult a writer I was to deal with
and don't deal with this guy and so on.
It's just nothing but trouble.
When I finally, when that passed,
and I got to working with editors who knew me personally
and knew what to sell, then I could sell everything I wrote.
So now you're seeing everything I write
and it looks like an explosion,
but I always was writing at that pace.
I just couldn't get it into print.
Peer's Anthony is actually a known diploma
utilizing only the author's first and second names.
When we asked Anthony why he uses a pen name,
we found out it's due to some long-range planning.
I decided on that before I ever sold a thing
and said, supposing I write,
and just supposing I'm successful
and just supposing I get to be famous.
Oh, this was an awful lot of supposing.
I mean, I hadn't even sold anything.
I'd been trying for several years and hadn't.
I've heard about writers such as John D. McDonald,
a mystery writer,
and he had to move several times
because people would come in and just drop in.
They would assume that he had nothing better to do
than to talk with every fan that dropped in on his address.
And so he would have to move so his address would be lost.
It would take him two or three years to find him
and then they'd take up his time again.
Why have this happened to me if I ever get that well known?
The answer was to use the pen name.
So I set up with a pen name from the outset
and it has protected me.
I get a lot of fan mail.
It goes through the publisher.
I don't get many people dropping in on me
because they can't find me.
They can look up in the phone book.
I don't know, maybe there's somebody locally called Anthony
that keeps getting people dropping in on him.
It's not me, you see.
So I have protected myself.
If I want someone to know who I am, I can tell them.
But the stranger that just says,
hey, gee, there's this writer, I think I'll drop in on him,
he is unable to find me.
And so now I'm beginning to approach the sort of success
that the pseudonym was prepared for.
I really never thought I would get there.
It was just saying, suppose,
and I planned well, I'm having more success
than I really believed I would have.
And now my pen name is serving to protect me,
to protect my time, really.
Not that I'm talking with people,
but you know, there would be a lot of people
that would just like to come.
If there's a writer there, they won't even have read
anything by that author.
They say, gee, that's a writer, I'll go talk to him.
But I don't need that sort of thing.
I'm willing to talk to people that have read my works,
that want to talk to me, ask me intelligent questions,
that people more like you.
You see, I'm not willing to talk to the man off the street.
He just has heard that I'm a writer.
He doesn't even know what I'm writing about.
But just, if there's a writer,
he just wants to go and talk to him and take up his time.
So that's the reason.
Again, a rather commercial reason, if you will.
But I think it's factored.
We'll have more about Piers Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
The prolific science fiction and fantasy author Piers Anthony
is often outspoken, and once he was even blacklisted
by the publishing community.
Anthony is a man with strong principles.
One of his principles is that he responds to fan mail.
It's a funny thing, I've never gone to a convention.
I've never met people personally that way,
mainly because I don't like to travel and I do like to write.
But I do answer my mail.
Yesterday, for last month, I simply went back
and counted up the letters I had written.
It was 64 letters.
I had to take off whole weekend just to answer my fan mail.
This is a problem, but if it gets much worse,
I'm going to have to start smacking off on that
because it takes me too long to finish a novel
if I have to keep taking time off to answer the letters.
But I am responsive. I do read them.
I think about them each as an individual letter
relating to what the fan has told me, what his needs are.
One reason Anthony feels so strongly about responding to fan mail
is that many of those who write them are children.
You see, many of my letters are from children,
9, 10, 11, 12 years old.
And I think it's very important to them that I do answer them.
When I was that age, I didn't like to be ignored
when something was important to me.
So I try to... It's a golden rule.
I try to treat them as I wish I had been treated.
And I don't...
You might say, well, what does a guy ten years old have to tell me?
Well, actually, he can tell me how he feels, how he reacts,
how important it is, and what influence my novel has had on him.
He will do so with a lot more tender than an adult will
because he's not trying to impress me.
He's just telling me what he likes.
He doesn't have the art to be, you know, for duplicity.
So that it's a little like animal psychology.
You can see that human motives in animals
because the animals don't know enough to conceal them.
So I value these letters.
I sometimes wish I just had more time.
If I could have full time for writing
and also full time for answering letters.
So there is... It's been mostly this year,
considerable correspondence developing.
And I would say 50 or 60% of it is by people under the age of, say, 18.
There's mostly young readers that I get.
Pierce Anthony has a strong philosophical motive for writing.
Making a living is part of the motive,
but it's not the whole thing or even the most important part.
I'd just like to think that I'm on Earth for some purpose
other than just to feed my face.
I want to do something and try to leave the universe a better place
than it was when I came into it.
If there's anything in my power I can do to improve things,
then I want to do it.
And I try to do this through the ability that I have,
that as a writer.
And so I want to write, in the guise of fiction,
to write material that people will read and become better persons
or get ideas that they wouldn't have.
I've had some comments from fans saying that after reading some of my novels,
they're thinking of the Splitting Finity series,
they decided that honesty is the best policy.
Now they admire honesty.
Well, that pleases me.
That's the kind of thing I want to do.
The person was planning to be dishonest and he reads one of my novels
and then he decides that he really would rather be honest.
I believe in honesty.
I want to encourage it.
I think there should be more of it in the world.
So I am trying to have a beneficial effect.
You might say to justify my own existence.
I'm making money out of it, yes.
But while I'm making the money, I also want to do something that,
well, when I die, I can look back and say I have done something useful in the world.
So this is why I'm not satisfied just to write and get paid for it
and not to worry about the theme or the content.
I want to do something that I can be satisfied with,
that I can be proud of, that will help people.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.